<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Beheadings</title>
  <link href="../Styles/main.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
</head>

<body>
  <h1>Beheadings</h1>

  <hr/>

  <p class="intro">Herein these four cases involving disqualification come up for recitation.</p>

  <h2 id="sigil_toc_id_43"><a href="parajika.xhtml#par1">Disqualification 1: The training precept on the act of sexual intercourse</a><a id="disq1"></a></h2>

  <p>If any bhikkhu [who] has entered upon the training and livelihood for bhikkhus, not having rejected the training, not having disclosed [his] incapability, should engage in the act of sexual intercourse, even with just a female animal, he is disqualified, not in communion.</p>

  <h2 id="sigil_toc_id_44"><a href="parajika.xhtml#par2">Disqualification 2: The training precept on the taking of what has not been given</a><a id="disq2"></a></h2>

  <p>If any bhikkhu should take [what has] not been given from a village or wilderness-area, which is reckoned as theft, [and] the taking of what has not been given [is] of the kind [that] on account of [it] kings, having caught the robber, would physically punish or imprison or banish [him, saying]: “You are a robber! You are a fool! You are insane! You are a thief!,” a bhikkhu taking [what has] not been given of such a kind, is also disqualified, not in communion.</p>

  <h2 id="sigil_toc_id_45"><a href="parajika.xhtml#par3">Disqualification 3: The training precept on (killing) a human being</a><a id="disq3"></a></h2>

  <p>If any bhikkhu should deliberately deprive a human being of life, or should seek an assassin for him, or should praise the attractiveness of death, or should incite [him] to death [saying]: “Dear man, what [use] is this bad, wretched life for you? Death is better than life for you!” should he, [having] such thought-and mind, [having such-] thought-and-intention, praise in manifold ways the beauty of death or incite [him] to death, he also is disqualified, not in communion.</p>

  <h2 id="sigil_toc_id_46"><a href="parajika.xhtml#par4">Disqualification 4: The training precept on superhuman states</a><a id="disq4"></a></h2>

  <p>If any bhikkhu, [though] not directly knowing [it], should claim a superhuman state pertaining to himself, [a state of] knowing and seeing [that is] suitable for the noble [ones], [saying]: “Thus I know! Thus I see!,” [and] then, on another occasion, [whether] being interrogated or not being interrogated, having committed [the offence], desiring purification, should say so: “[Although] not knowing [it,] I spoke thus [saying]: 'I know,' not seeing [it, I spoke, saying:] 'I see.' I bluffed vainly [and] falsely,” except [when said] in overestimation, he also is disqualified, not in communion.</p>

  <p style="text-align: center;">Venerables, the four cases involving disqualification have been recited.<br/> A bhikkhu who has committed any one of them, does not obtain the communion with bhikkhus. As [he was] before, so [he is] after [committing it]: he is one who is disqualified, not in communion.<br/> Concerning that I ask the Venerables: [Are you] pure in this?<br/> A second time again I ask: [Are you] pure in this?<br/> A third time again I ask: [Are you] pure in this?<br/> The venerables are pure in this, therefore there is silence, so do I bear this [in mind].</p>

  <p class="outro">The recitation of the [cases involving] disqualification is finished</p>
</body>
</html>