<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>The Recitation of the Introduction</title>
  <link href="../Styles/main.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
</head>

<body>
  <h1><a href="nidanuddeso.xhtml">The Recitation of the Introduction</a><a id="introduction"></a></h1>

  <hr/>

  <p>Venerable Sir, let the Community listen to me! Today is a fifteenth / fourteenth / unity [day] Observance. If it is suitable to the Community, [then] the Community should do the Observance [and] should recite the Disciplinary Code.</p>

  <p>What is the preliminary for the Community?</p>

  <p>Venerables, announce the purity, [for] I shall recite the Disciplinary Code. Let us all [who are] present listen to it carefully [and] let us take it to mind. Whoever may have an offence, he should disclose [it]. When there is no offence, [then it] is to be silent. By the silence I shall know the Venerables [with the thought]: “[They are] pure.”</p>

  <p>As an answer occurs to [a bhikkhu] who is asked individually, just so in such an assembly [as this one] there is the announcement up to the third time. But if any bhikkhu, [who is] remembering [an offence] when the announcement is being made up to the third time, should not disclose the existing offence, there is [a further offence of] deliberate false speech for him. But, venerables, deliberate false speech has been called an obstructive act by the Fortunate One. Therefore, by a bhikkhu who is remembering, who has committed [an offence], who is desiring purification, an existing offence is to be disclosed; because, [after] having disclosed [it], there is comfort for him.</p>

  <p style="text-align: center;">Venerables, the introduction has been recited.<br/> Concerning that I ask the Venerables: [Are you] pure in this?<br/> A second time again I ask: [Are you] pure in this?<br/> A third time again I ask: [Are you] pure in this?<br/> The venerables are pure in this, therefore there is silence, so do I bear this [in mind].</p>

  <p class="outro">The recitation of the introduction is finished</p>
</body>
</html>