<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Preliminary Duties</title>
  <link href="../Styles/main.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
</head>

<body>
  <h1><a href="pubbakicca.xhtml">Preliminary Duties</a><a id="preliminary-duties"></a></h1>

  <hr/>

  <p>May the Senior please give me permission to recite the Pāṭimokkha.</p>

  <p>〈 Eldest Bhikkhu: “I give permission to the Venerable one.” 〉 Before doing the Uposatha the ninefold duty should be done:</p>

  <p>The sweeping of that place; the lighting of the lamp there; the spreading of the sitting mats; the setting out of water for drinking and washing the bringing of the consent of the bhikkhus who are deserving [to give their] consent; and of those bhikkhus who do not participate in the Uposatha the bringing of the purity too; the telling of the season; the counting of the bhikkhus, and the instructing of the bhikkhunīs.</p>

  <p>Herein with regards the first four duties there is no duty of [lighting] the lamp because of the state of there being sunlight now, the three other ones have been done and completed by monastery-attendants who know the bhikkhus’ protocol and by bhikkhus.</p>

  <p>[At night:] Herein with regards the first four duties there is no duty of [lighting] the lamp because of the state of there being sunlight now, the three other ones have been done and completed by bhikkhus who know the bhikkhus’ protocol.</p>

  <p>There is no bringing of consent [and] bringing of purity because of the absence in this boundary of seated bhikkhus who have left arm’s length.</p>

  <p>The so-called “telling the season” is declaring the season thus: this number [of Uposathas] have passed, this number [of Uposathas] are left. In this dispensation there are three seasons, [namely] winter,summer, and rains.</p>

  <p>This is the * season, and in this season there are eight Uposathas.<br/> With this fortnight:<br/> One Uposatha has arrived,<br/> # Uposathas have past,<br/> # Uposathas are left.<br/> Thus the telling of the season is to be borne in mind by all the venerables.</p>

  <p>〈 “So it is, Venerable Sir! / Friend!” 〉</p>

  <p>The so-called “counting of the bhikkhus” is the counting of the bhikkhus [thus]: “In this Uposatha hall so many bhikkhus have gathered for the purpose of [performing] the Uposatha”. In this Uposatha-hall four bhikkhus have gathered.</p>

  <p>〈 “So it is, Venerable Sir! / Friend!” 〉</p>

  <p>There is no instruction of the bhikkhunīs because of their non-existence in the proximity.</p>

  <p>Thus, because of the state of having been done of the preliminary duties, which had an opportunity of doing (them), and because of the naturalness of the preliminary duties which had no opportunity of doing (them), the nine-fold Preliminary Function has been completed.</p>

  <p>When the preliminary duty has been finished: If the day is a certain one of the fourteenth, fifteenth or the Unity, like today is the fifteenth day Uposatha.</p>

  <ol>
    <li>Whatever bhikkhus are entitled [to carry out the legal] act, who are qualified for the Uposatha of the Community, four or more than that, regular, who have not committed an offence of pārājika, who have not been suspended by the Community,</li>

    <li>and they, not having left arms-length, remain in one boundary,</li>

    <li>and if among them common offences, founded on eating at the wrong time and so on, are not found,</li>

    <li>and if among them within arms-length there is no person fit to be excluded, who is to be excluded from arms-length by making [him go] outside,</li>

    <li>then that [legal] act of Uposatha endowed with these four characteristics is called “[one that] has reached suitability”, [and is] fit to perform.</li>

    <li>Having known the state of reached suitability of the [legal] act of Uposatha, it is to be approved of by the Community [that] the Uposatha is being done now”.</li>
  </ol>

  <p>〈 “So it is, Venerable Sir! / Friend!” 〉</p>

  <p>〈 Eldest Bhikkhu: “Having made to undertake the preparations and preliminary duties I make the invitation to recite the Disciplinary Code with the approval of the seated community.” 〉</p>
</body>
</html>