<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Trainings</title>
  <link href="../Styles/main.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
</head>

<body>
  <h1>Trainings</h1>

  <hr/>

  <p class="intro">Venerables, these cases related to the training come up for recitation.</p>

  <h2 class="h2-chapters" id="sigil_toc_id_78">The Section on Being Even All Around</h2>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh1-2">Training 1 &amp; 2: The training precept on being even all around</a><a id="training1-2"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall wear [the under-robe] even all around,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <p>“I shall wrap [the outer-robes] even all around,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh3-4">Training 3 &amp; 4: The training precept on being well covered</a><a id="training3-4"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall go well covered inside an inhabited area,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <p>“I shall sit well covered inside an inhabited area,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh5-6">Training 5 &amp; 6: The training precept on being well restrained</a><a id="training5-6"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall go well-restrained inside an inhabited area,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <p>“I shall sit well-restrained inside an inhabited area,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh7-8">Training 7 &amp; 8: The training precept on the eyes cast down</a><a id="training7-8"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall go with the eyes cast down inside an inhabited area,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <p>“I shall sit with the eyes cast down inside an inhabited area,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh9-10">Training 9 &amp; 10: The training precept on (robes) lifted up</a><a id="training9-10"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not go with [robes] lifted up inside an inhabited area,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <p>“I shall not sit with [robes] lifted up inside an inhabited area,” thus the training is to be done. The section [starting with the rule] on being even all round is first</p>

  <h2 class="h2-chapters" id="sigil_toc_id_79">The Section on Loud Laughter</h2>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh11-12">Training 11 &amp; 12: The training precept on loud laughter</a><a id="training11-12"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not go with loud laughter inside an inhabited area,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <p>“I shall not sit with loud laughter inside an inhabited area,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh13-14">Training 13 &amp; 14: The training precept on loud sounds</a><a id="training13-14"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall go quiet[ly] inside an inhabited area,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <p>“I shall sit quiet[ly] inside an inhabited area,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh15-16">Training 15 &amp; 16: The training precept on swaying the body</a><a id="training15-16"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not go swaying the body inside an inhabited area,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <p>“I shall not sit swaying the body inside an inhabited area,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh17-18">Training 17 &amp; 18: The training precept on swaying the arms</a><a id="training17-18"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not go swaying the arms inside an inhabited area,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <p>“I shall not sit swaying the arms inside an inhabited area,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh19-20">Training 19 &amp; 20: The training precept on swaying the head</a><a id="training19-20"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not go swaying the head inside an inhabited area,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <p>“I shall not sit swaying the head inside an inhabited area,” thus the training is to be done. The section [starting with the rule] on loud laughter is second</p>

  <h2 class="h2-chapters" id="sigil_toc_id_80">The Section on Making Into a Prop</h2>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh21-22">Training 21 &amp; 22: The training precept on making into a prop</a><a id="training21-22"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not go having made [the arms] a prop inside an inhabited area,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <p>“I shall not sit having made [the arms] a prop inside an inhabited area,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh23-24">Training 23 &amp; 24: The training precept on being (with the head) covered</a><a id="training23-24"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not go with [the head] covered inside an inhabited area,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <p>“I shall not sit with [the head] covered inside an inhabited area,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh25">Training 25: The training precept on crouching</a><a id="training25"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not go in a crouching [posture] inside an inhabited area,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh26">Training 26: The training precept on (knees being) clasped around</a><a id="training26"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not sit with the [knees] clasped-around inside an inhabited area,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh27">Training 27: The training precept on accepting in a respectul manner</a><a id="training27"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall accept alms-food appreciatively,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh28">Training 28: The training precept on paying attention to the bowl (while) accepting</a><a id="training28"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall accept alms-food paying attention to the bowl,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh29">Training 29: The training precept on accepting curry in the proper proportion</a><a id="training29"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall accept alms-food which has curry in the proper proportion,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh30">Training 30: The training precept on (alms-food) level with the rim</a><a id="training30"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall accept alms-food which is level with the rim,” thus the training is to be done. The section [starting with the rule] on making into a prop is third</p>

  <h2 class="h2-chapters" id="sigil_toc_id_81">The Section on Eating in a Respectful Manner</h2>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh31">Training 31: The training precept on eating in a respectful manner</a><a id="training31"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall eat alms-food appreciatively,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh32">Training 32: The training precept on paying attention (while) eating</a><a id="training32"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall eat alms-food paying attention to the bowl,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh33">Training 33: The training precept on (eating) systematically</a><a id="training33"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall eat alms-food systematically,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh34">Training 34: The training precept on the proper proportion</a><a id="training34"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall eat alms-food which has curry in the proper proportion,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh35">Training 35: The training precept on (alms-food) not made into a heap</a><a id="training35"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not eat alms-food, having pressed [it] down into a shall heap,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh36">Training 36: The training precept on covering with rice</a><a id="training36"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not cover curry or condiment with rice out of liking for more,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh37">Training 37: The training precept on suggesting rice or curry</a><a id="training37"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not eat curry or rice, [when] not ill, having requested [it] for his own benefit, thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh38">Training 38: The training precept on finding fault</a><a id="training38"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not look at another's bowl finding fault,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh39">Training 39: The training precept on morsels</a><a id="training39"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not make an over-large morsel [of food],” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh40">Training 40: The training precept on pieces (of food)</a><a id="training40"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall eat a round piece [of food],” thus the training is to be done. The section [starting with the rule] on respectful manner is fourth</p>

  <h2 class="h2-chapters" id="sigil_toc_id_82">The Section on Morsels of Food</h2>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh41">Training 41: The training precept on what has not been brought to (the mouth)</a><a id="training41"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not open the mouth when the morsel [of food] has not been brought to [it],” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh42">Training 42: The training precept on eating</a><a id="training42"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not put the whole hand onto the mouth while eating,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh43">Training 43: The training precept on having a morsel (of food)</a><a id="training43"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not speak with a mouth which has a morsel [of food in it],” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh44">Training 44: The training precept on the tossing up of bits (of food)</a><a id="training44"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not eat tossing up bits [of food],” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh45">Training 45: The training precept on biting off a morsel</a><a id="training45"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not eat biting off a morsel [of food],” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh46">Training 46: The training precept on puffing up the cheeks</a><a id="training46"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not eat puffing up [the cheeks],” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh47">Training 47: The training precept on shaking off the hand</a><a id="training47"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not eat shaking [food] off the hand,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh48">Training 48: The training precept on scattering rice grains</a><a id="training48"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not eat scattering rice-grains,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh49">Training 49: The training precept on sticking out the tongue</a><a id="training49"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not eat sticking out the tongue,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh50">Training 50: The training precept on making chomping (sounds)</a><a id="training50"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not eat making chomping [sounds],” thus the training is to be done. The section [starting with the rule] on morsels of food is fifth</p>

  <h2 class="h2-chapters" id="sigil_toc_id_83">The Section on Slurping</h2>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh51">Training 51: The training precept on making slurping (sounds)</a><a id="training51"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not eat making slurping [sounds],” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh52">Training 52: The training precept on licking the hand</a><a id="training52"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not eat licking the hand,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh53">Training 53: The training precept on licking the bowl</a><a id="training53"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not eat licking the bowl,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh54">Training 54: The training precept on licking the lips</a><a id="training54"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not eat licking the lip[s],” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh55">Training 55: The training precept on (a hand soiled) with food</a><a id="training55"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not accept a drinking-water cup with a hand which is [soiled] with food,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh56">Training 56: The training precept on (bowl-washing water) with rice grains</a><a id="training56"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not throw away bowl-washing water which has rice-grains [in it] in an inhabited area,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh57">Training 57: The training precept on the sunshade in (his) hand</a><a id="training57"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not teach Dhamma to one who has a sunshade in [his] hand, [and] who is not ill,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh58">Training 58: The training precept on the stick in (his) hand</a><a id="training58"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not teach Dhamma to one who has a stick in [his] hand, [and] who is not ill,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh59">Training 59: The training precept on the knife in (his) hand</a><a id="training59"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not teach Dhamma to one who has a knife in [his] hand [and] who is not ill,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh60">Training 60: The training precept on the weapon in (his) hand</a><a id="training60"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not teach Dhamma to one who has a weapon in [his] hand, [and] who is not ill,” thus the training is to be done. The section [starting with the rule] on slurping is sixth</p>

  <h2 class="h2-chapters" id="sigil_toc_id_84">The Section on Shoes</h2>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh61">Training 61: The training precept on shoes</a><a id="training61"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not teach Dhamma to one who is wearing shoes, [and] who is not ill,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh62">Training 62: The training precept on sandals</a><a id="training62"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not teach Dhamma to one who is wearing sandals, [and] who is not ill,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh63">Training 63: The training precept on vehicles</a><a id="training63"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not teach Dhamma to one who is in a vehicle, [and] who is not ill,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh64">Training 64: The training precept on couches</a><a id="training64"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not teach Dhamma to one who is on a couch, [and] who is not ill,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh65">Training 65: The training precept on (knees being) clasped around</a><a id="training65"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not teach Dhamma to one sitting with [the knees] clasped-around, [and] who is not ill,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh66">Training 66: The training precept on being wrapped</a><a id="training66"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not teach Dhamma to one whose head is wrapped [with a turban], [and] who is not ill,” thus the training is to be done. g lish 112 The section [starting with the rule] on slurping is sixth</p>

  <h2 class="h2-chapters" id="sigil_toc_id_85">The Section on Shoes</h2>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh67">Training 67: The training precept on being covered</a><a id="training67"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not teach Dhamma to one whose head is covered, [and] who is not ill,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh68">Training 68: The training precept on (sitting) on the ground</a><a id="training68"></a></h3>

  <p>“Having sat down on the ground, I shall not teach Dhamma, to one who is sitting on a seat, [and] who is not ill,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh69">Training 69: The training precept on a low seat</a><a id="training69"></a></h3>

  <p>“Having sat down on a low seat, I shall not teach Dhamma to one who is sitting on a high seat [and] who is not ill,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh70">Training 70: The training precept on standing</a><a id="training70"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not teach Dhamma [while] standing, to one who is sitting, [and] who is not ill,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh71">Training 71: The training precept on going behind</a><a id="training71"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not teach Dhamma [while] walking behind, to one who is going in front, [and] who is not ill,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh72">Training 72: The training precept on going off the path</a><a id="training72"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not teach Dhamma [while] walking off the path to one walking on the path, [and] who is not ill,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh73">Training 73: The training precept on excreting while standing</a><a id="training73"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not excrete or urinate [while] standing [and while] not ill,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh74">Training 74: The training precept on excreting on crops</a><a id="training74"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not excrete or urinate or spit on crops, [while] not ill,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <h3 class="h3-sub-chapters sigil_not_in_toc"><a href="sekhiya.xhtml#sekh75">Training 75: The training precept on excreting in water</a><a id="training75"></a></h3>

  <p>“I shall not excrete or urinate or spit in water, [while] not ill,” thus the training is to be done.</p>

  <p style="text-align: center;">The section [starting with the rule] on shoes is seventh</p>

  <p style="text-align: center;">Venerables, the cases related to the training have been recited.<br/> Concerning that I ask the Venerables: [Are you] pure in this?<br/> A second time again I ask: [Are you] pure in this?<br/> A third time again I ask: [Are you] pure in this?<br/> The Venerables are pure in this, therefore there is silence, thus I keep this [in mind].</p>

  <p class="outro">The cases related to the training have finished</p>
</body>
</html>