<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Uncertain Cases</title>
  <link href="../Styles/main.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
</head>

<body>
  <h1>Uncertain Cases</h1>

  <hr/>

  <p class="intro">Venerables, these two uncertain cases come up for recitation.</p>

  <h2 id="sigil_toc_id_60"><a href="aniyata.xhtml#aniy1">Uncertain Case 1: The first uncertain training precept</a><a id="unc1"></a></h2>

  <p>If any bhikkhu should sit down together with a woman, one [man] with one [woman], privately, on a concealed seat [that is] sufficiently fit for doing [it], [and then if] a female lay-follower whose words can be trusted having seen that, should speak according to one of three cases: according to disqualification, according to what concerns the community in the beginning and in the rest [of the procedure], or according to expiation, [then] the bhikkhu who is admitting the sitting down should be made to do [what is] according to one of three cases: according to disqualification, or according to what concerns the community in the beginning and in the rest [of the procedure], or according to expiation, or according to whatever that female lay-follower whose words can be trusted should say, according to that the bhikkhu is to be made to do. This is an uncertain case.</p>

  <h2 id="sigil_toc_id_61"><a href="aniyata.xhtml#aniy2">Uncertain Case 2: The second uncertain training precept</a><a id="unc2"></a></h2>

  <p>But even if the seat is neither concealed nor sufficiently fit for doing it, but is sufficient for speaking suggestively to a woman with depraved words: if any bhikkhu should sit down on such a seat together with a woman—one [man] with one [woman], privately—[and then if] a female lay-follower whose words can be trusted having seen that, should speak according to one of two cases: according to what concerns the community in the beginning and in the rest, or according to expiation, [then] the bhikkhu admitting the sitting down is to be made to do according to one of two cases: according to what concerns the community in the beginning and in the rest [of the procedure], or according to expiation, or according to whatever that female lay-follower whose words can be trusted should say, according to that the bhikkhu is to be made to do, this too is an uncertain case.</p>

  <p style="text-align: center;">Venerables, the two uncertain cases have been recited. <br/>Concerning that I ask the Venerables: [Are you] pure in this?<br/> A second time again I ask: [Are you] pure in this?<br/> A third time again I ask: [Are you] pure in this?<br/> The venerables are pure in this, therefore there is silence, thus I bear this [in mind].</p>

  <p class="outro">The recitation of the uncertain [cases] is finished</p>
</body>
</html>